---
layout: post
title: "On Chapter 7 of Laws of Form"
date: 2017-07-28
---
Rigorous proofs of the theorems in chapter 7 of _Laws of Form_.
<!--more-->

{::comment} load enclose.js {:/comment}
$\require{enclose}$
$
\newcommand{\CR}[1]{\enclose{actuarial}{#1}}
\newcommand{\st}[1]{\small\{\text{#1}}}
\newcommand{\v}[1]{\vphantom{#1}}
\newcommand{\b}[1]{\vphantom{#1}\hphantom{#1}}
$
---------------------------------------------------------------<br>

### Introduction

In chapter 7 of _Laws of Form_, Spencer-Brown extends the scope of his
basic equations to expressions involving any finite number of variables. Some of
his arguments, when he provides them, are rigorous; others are mere sketches,
and some possible generalizations are left unmentioned. This post will present
fully rigorous proofs of the propositions.

Below is a list of axioms and theorems referenced in subsequent proofs:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\CR{\CR{pr}\;\CR{qr}}\, = \CR{\CR{p}\;\CR{q}}\,r \tag{J2}\\
&\CR{pr}\;\CR{qr} \,= \CR{\CR{\CR{p}\;\CR{q}}\,r} \tag{J2.1}\\
& \CR{\CR{a}} \,= a \tag{C1}\\
 &\CR{ab}\,b \,= \CR{a\v{b}}\, b \tag{C2}\\
 & \CR{\CR{\CR{a}\, b}\,c} \,= \CR{ac\v{b}}\; \CR{\CR{b}\,c} \tag{C7}\\
 & \CR{\CR{a\v{b}}\;\CR{br}\;\CR{cr\v{b}}} \,= \CR{\CR{a\v{b}}\;\CR{b}\;\CR{c\v{b}}}\;
                                   \CR{\v{\CR{b}}\CR{a\v{b}}\;\CR{r\v{b}}} \tag{C8}\\
 &\CR{ \CR{\CR{a\v{b}}\;\CR{r\v{b}}}\; \CR{\CR{b}\;\CR{r\v{b}}}\; \CR{\CR{x\v{b}}\,r}\; \CR{\CR{y\v{b}}\,r}  } \,=
    \CR{\CR{r}\, ab}\; \CR{rxy} \tag{C9}\\
&\CR{\CR{\CR{a}\;\CR{r}} \CR{\CR{x}\,r}} \,= \CR{\CR{r}\,a}\; \CR{rx} \tag{C9.1}
\end{align*}
$$

### General theorems
 Spencer-Brown begins the chapter by sketching an inductive generalization of
 J2. Here is the proof in full.

 ***Theorem (J2\*)***. $\quad \CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}}\,r\,=\CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{a_nr}}$

_Proof._ The proof proceeds by induction on $n$. The base case is J2, where
_n=2_. Let the induction hypothesis (J2h) be:
$\CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}}\,r\,=\CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{a_nr}}$

The induction step:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\; \CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}\;\CR{a_{n+1}}}\,r \\
&= \; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}}}\;\CR{a_{n+1}}}\,r \tag{C1}\\
&=\;  \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}}\,r}\;\CR{a_{n+1}r}} \tag{J2} \\
&= \; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{a_nr}}}\;\CR{a_{n+1}r}} \tag{J2h} \\
&=\; \CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{a_nr}\;\CR{a_{n+1}r}} \tag{C1}
\end{align*}
$$

_Alternate proof._
A very similar and equally short proof, using the same induction hypothesis as above.

The induction step:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\; \CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}\;\CR{a_{n+1}}}\,r \\
&=\;  \CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{\CR{\CR{a_n}\;\CR{a_{n+1}}}}}\,r \tag{C1}\\
&=\; \CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{\CR{\CR{a_n}\;\CR{a_{n+1}}}\,r}} \tag{J2h} \\
&=\; \CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{\CR{\CR{a_nr}\;\CR{a_{n+1}r}}}} \tag{J2} \\
&=\; \CR{\CR{a_1r}\;\CR{a_2r}\dots \CR{a_nr}\;\CR{a_{n+1}r}} \tag{C1}
\end{align*}
$$

Before continuing, I prove a useful generalization of corollary J2.1.

***Theorem (J2.1\*)***. $\quad \CR{a_{1}r}\;\CR{a_{2}r}\dots  \CR{a_{n}r}\, =
\CR{\CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}}\,r}$

_Proof._

$$
\begin{align*}
&\; \CR{a_{1}r}\;\CR{a_{2}r}\dots  \CR{a_{n}r} \\
&=\;\CR{ \CR{\CR{a_{1}r}\;\CR{a_{2}r}\dots  \CR{a_{n}r}}} \tag{C1}\\
&=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{a_2}\dots \CR{a_n}}\,r} \tag{J2*}
\end{align*}
$$

Spencer-Brown states the generalizations of C8 and C9 but omits the proofs,
merely noting that they are similar to J2*.

***Theorem (C8\*)***. $\quad \CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}\;\CR{b_2r}\dots \CR{b_nr}}\,=
\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}}\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}}$

_Proof._ The proof proceeds by induction on _n_. The base case is C8, where _n=2_.
Let the induction hypothesis (C8h) be: $\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}\;\CR{b_2r}\dots \CR{b_nr}}\,=
\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}}\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}}$

The induction step:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}\;\CR{b_2r}\dots \CR{b_nr}\;\CR{b_{n+1}r}} \\
&=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}}}\;\CR{b_2r}\dots \CR{b_nr}\;\CR{b_{n+1}r}} \tag{C1}\\
&=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}}}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}}}
 \;\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}} \tag{C8h}\\
&=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}}}\; \CR{\CR{r\v{b_1}}}}\;\CR{\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}}}} \tag{J2.1}\\
 &=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}}}\,r}\;\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}} \tag{C1 twice}\\
 &=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}}}}\; \CR{b_1}}\,r}\; \CR{a\v{b_1}} } \tag{J2.1}\\
 &=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}} }\,r}\; \CR{a\v{b_1}} } \tag{C1}\\
 &=\; \CR{  \CR{\CR{\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}} }\;\CR{\CR{r\v{b_1}}}}\; \CR{a\v{b_1}} } \tag{C1}\\
 &=\;\CR{\CR{ \CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\;\CR{b_{n+1}}}\; \CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}}}} \tag{J2}\\
 &=\; \CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}\; \CR{b_{n+1}}}\; \CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}}\tag{C1}
\end{align*}
$$

J2.1* allows for a quicker direct proof:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1r}\;\CR{b_2r}\dots\CR{b_nr}}\\
&=\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\; \CR{\CR{\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots\CR{b_n}}\, r}} \tag{J2.1*}\\
&=\;\CR{ \CR{a\v{b_1}}\; \CR{\CR{\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots\CR{b_n}}\; \CR{\CR{r\v{b_1}}}}} \tag{C1}\\
&=\;\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots\CR{b_n}}\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}}}}\tag{J2}\\
&=\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots\CR{b_n}}\;\CR{\CR{a\v{b_1}}\;\CR{r\v{b_1}}} \tag{C1}
\end{align*}
$$

***Theorem (C9\*)***. $\; \CR{ \CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{r}}\; \CR{\CR{a_2}\;\CR{r}}\dots\CR{\CR{a_n}\;\CR{r}} \;
\CR{\CR{x_1}\,r} \;\CR{\CR{x_2}\,r} \dots\CR{\CR{x_m}\,r} }\,=
\CR{\CR{r}\, a_1a_2\dots a_n}\; \CR{rx_1x_2\dots x_m}$

_Proof._

$$
\begin{align*}
&\;\CR{ \CR{\CR{a_1}\;\CR{r}} \CR{\CR{a_2}\;\CR{r}}\dots \CR{\CR{a_n}\;\CR{r}} \;
\CR{\CR{x_1}\,r}\; \CR{\CR{x_2}\,r} \dots \CR{\CR{x_m}\,r} } \\
&=\;\CR{\CR{\CR{ \CR{\CR{a_1}} \;\CR{\CR{a_2}}\dots \CR{\CR{a_n}}}\;\CR{r}}
\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{x_1}}\; \CR{\CR{x_2}} \dots \CR{\CR{x_m}}}\,r} } \tag{J2.1* twice}\\
&=\;\CR{\CR{\CR{a_1a_2\dots a_n}\;\CR{r}}\;\CR{\CR{x_1 x_2 \dots x_m}\,r} } \tag{C1 $n\!+\!m$ times}\\
&=\;  \CR{\CR{r}\, a_1a_2\dots a_n} \;\CR{rx_1x_2\dots x_m}\tag{C9.1}
\end{align*}
$$

Next we prove a generalizion of C2.

***Theorem (C2\*)***. $\quad \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_nb}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\,b =
\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_n}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\,b$

_Proof._ The proof proceeds by induction on _n_. The base case is C2, where _n=1_. Let the induction
hypothesis (C2h) be: $\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_nb}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\,b = \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_n}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\,b$

Substitute $\CR{a_{n+1}\,b}\,a_n$ for $a_n$ . The induction step then follows immediately:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\;\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_{n+1}\,b}\, a_nb}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\,b \tag{sub}\\
&=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_{n+1}\,b}\, a_n}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\,b \tag{C2h}
\end{align*}
$$

Spencer-Brown does not mention a generalized C7. Here is one possible version.

***Theorem (C7\*)***. $\;$ _Let $n$ be a positive even number. Then for all such $n$ the
following pair of equations holds_:

$$
\begin{align*}
\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_n}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}
&=\;  \CR{\CR{a_n}\, a_{n-1}\dots a_3 a_1} \dots\,\CR{\CR{a_4}\, a_3 a_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1}\tag{i}\\
\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_{n+1}}\, a_n}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}
&=\, \CR{ a_{n+1}\,a_{n-1}\dots a_3 a_1}\;
\CR{\CR{a_n}\, a_{n-1}\dots\,a_3 a_1} \dots \CR{\CR{a_4}\, a_3 a_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1}\tag{ii}
\end{align*}
$$

_Proof._ Let equation (i) be the induction hypothesis. The base case  is the
identity $\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1}=\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1}$, where _n=2_. Now substitute $\CR{a_{n+1}}\,a_n$ for $a_n$. Then,
$$
\begin{align*}
&\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_{n+1}}\, a_n}\dots}\, a_2}\,a_1}\\
&=\; \CR{\CR{\CR{a_{n+1}}\, a_n}\, a_{n-1}\dots a_3 a_1} \dots \CR{\CR{a_4}\, a_3 a_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1}\tag{i}\\
&=\; \CR{ a_{n+1}a_{n-1}\dots a_3 a_1} \;\CR{\CR{a_n}\, a_{n-1}\dots a_3 a_1} \dots \CR{\CR{a_4}\, a_3 a_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1}\tag{C7}
\end{align*}
$$

proving the implication from (i) to (ii). In equation (ii) substitute $\CR{a_{n+2}}\,a_{n+1}$ for $a_{n+1}$. Then,

$$
\begin{align*}
&\; \CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{\CR{a_{n+2}}\, a_{n+1}}\dots}\, a_2}a_1}
=\; \CR{\CR{a_{n+2}}\, a_{n+1}\dots a_3 a_1} \dots \CR{\CR{a_4}\, a_3 a_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\, a_1} \tag{ii}
\end{align*}
$$

proving (i) for the succeeding even number. This proves the proposition for all $n\ge2$,
and hence for all echelons of depth greater than or equal to 2.

***Theorem (T14)***. $\;$ _Any expression can be reduced to an equivalent expression not more than two crosses deep.
Specifically, any expression $E$ is equivalent to_
$\CR{\CR{a_1}\,b_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\,b_2}\dots \CR{\CR{a_n}\,b_n}\;\CR{c_1\}\;\CR{c_2}\dots
\CR{c_m}\,d$, _where_ $a_i, b_i, c_i, d$ _are composed (at most) of  juxtapositions of variables and the two constants,_
$\CR{\b{a}}$ _and_ $\quad$.

_Proof._
Repeated applications of C7* to any expression demonstrates the theorem.
Spencer-Brown uses C7 (not having proven a generalization), but it comes to the same thing.

The final theorem follows Spencer-Brown closely.

***Theorem (T15)***. $\;$ _Given any expression $E$ and any variable $v$, $E$ can be reduced to an equivalent
expression containing not more than two appearances of $v$._

_Proof._
In the case where $v$ is not in $E$, the
theorem is trivially true, since $E= \CR{\CR{v}\,v}\, E$ by J1. So let us suppose that $v$
appears in $E$. Using C7* as many times as necessary, we rewrite $E$:

$$
\begin{equation*}
E= \CR{\CR{va_1}\,b_1}\;\CR{\CR{va_2}\,b_2}\dots \CR{\CR{va_n}\,b_n}\;\CR{vc_1}\;\CR{vc_2}\dots \CR{vc_m}\,d
\end{equation*}
$$

where $a_i ,b_i, c_i,$ and $d$ are expressions free of $v$. Then, by _n_ applications of C8.1,

$$
\begin{align*}
E &= \CR{\CR{v}\,b_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_1}\,b_1}\;\CR{\CR{v}\,b_2}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\,b_2}\dots \CR{\CR{v}\,b_n}\;
\CR{\CR{a_n}\,b_n}\;\CR{vc_1}\;\CR{vc_2}\dots \CR{vc_m}\,d \\
&=\CR{\CR{v}\,b_1}\;\CR{\CR{v}\,b_2}\dots \CR{\CR{v}\,b_n}\;\CR{vc_1}\;\CR{vc_2}\dots \CR{vc_m}\,f \\
&\quad\quad\quad\text{(where $f=\CR{\CR{a_1}\,b_1}\;\CR{\CR{a_2}\,b_2}\dots \CR{\CR{a_n}\,b_n}\, d$ is free
of $v$.) }\\
&= \CR{\CR{\CR{b_1}\;\CR{b_2}\dots \CR{b_n}}\;\CR{v\v{b_1}}}\; \CR{\CR{\CR{c_1\v{b_1}}\;\CR{c_2\v{b_1}}\dots \CR{c_m\v{b_1}}}\,v\v{b_1}}\, f \tag{J2.1* twice}
\end{align*}
$$
